So in this lecture we are going to be looking at the cause of an error in the simulation which is currently
meaning that we are unable to have the same location on both the client and server and the results in
very funny gameplay doesn't it.
You can see the difference in the location So let's dive in and see what those sources of error are
and how we might approach fixing them.
So let's start with an overview of how the simulation error affects our game.
If I go ahead and hit play I'm playing here with two players go ahead hit play and put a server on the
right and client on the left hand drive my client around a little bit.
So I drive around I'm going to particularly go between these cones which seem to cause a bit of error
and then go all the way back to try and make it back to the bago you can already see the problem.
You can see that on the server.
My car is in a completely different location and is responding to my keypresses in a very different
way to what I'm doing here on the actual client.
So why is this.
Why is it that when I give keypresses to the client and insane key presses to the server.
They don't do exactly the same thing.
Well to do that we need to figure out what are the actual sources and overview the different sources
of simulation error.
The first thing we need to understand though is what numerical integration is.
You may have encountered integration before as the opposite of differentiation.
So let's just take a look and a quick overview of what that is.
So we've got an acceleration over time here and we're going to just be dealing with a really simple
case of constant acceleration so that's what you can see here.
This line is remaining constant over time as it changes well as time goes on.
Acceleration doesn't change so you've got constant acceleration and we've got the formula above this
which tells us that the delta V is equal to the acceleration multiplied by the delta T.
So that's actually a form of very rudimentary integration going on right there.
This simple multiplication.
Because remember that integration is trying to find the area underneath the curve and actually the change
in velocity over a given time period is the area underneath the acceleration curve.
And what we've been doing without really saying it is we have been doing a numerical integration in
our code we've been doing this formula here which multiplies the acceleration by the delta time had
that you look on this graph.
Well we've got our delta time that might be this span of time here.
We've got the acceleration which is this span here basically the whole height of the line and then our
delta v is the square.
That's what we're doing multiplying the size of the square to get its area.
So we get this area underneath the curve so that's very straightforward very easy when our curve is
just a straight line like this a straight horizontal line.
What happens if our curves suddenly is all crazy and squiggly like this which is much more realistic
in a real game.
Well then our Delta team multiplied by a is going to give us something which looks like this which as
you can tell isn't the same as the area underneath as quickly curve is much more.
In this case.
But it could be much less.
It really depends.
And what does it depend on.
Well it depends on the size of that delta t as one thing.
It also depends on just how squiggly the line is.
So you can see that there already were going to be getting some errors here just because we're doing
this simplified method of integration and one way that we could try to improve this without having to
do the actual integration we're just trying to do numerical integration because there isn't really a
function to integrate the user input the user inputs going to be completely random squiggly lines.
We can't integrate that.
We have to do a numerical approximation.
We can try and get better by making smaller Delta teams.
But as you can see even with this fairly simple line the smaller the delta T is still going to give
you errors and we could go further there are other numerical integration methods that try to alleviate
some of this error but there's always going to be some error because you just can't get to the actual
function and it's going to depend where you slice your Delta ts as to the area you're going to get underneath
the curve so you're going to get slightly different areas depending on what where your timestamps are.
And that is the source of the difference between the client and the server the client and the server
will be running at different frame rates which means that the sizes of the boxes are going to be different
and they're not going to be consistent either so they're going to be variable they're going to be varying
underneath the area.
This curve which means that the area underneath that you get measured the delta V is going to be different.
Okay so that is basically the key source of all that error is coming from this numerical integration
and the differences in the delta T.
But there are some things that make it even worse.
And one of these is the magnification of error with integration.
So here we've got a formula which accounts for some error because remember we've just calculated our
delta V.
It had some error from our numerical integration and have encompassed this into the formula with this
plus E plus error.
And what does actually look like.
Well it adds a bit to the line.
It adds this e amount and it means that the velocity is now just a little bit more than it really should
have been.
So that's why there's an error.
Now this doesn't look like a very big difference but what happens if we've got a delta T and we look
at the area and the sheer amount of error that's going to crop up in delta x while you can see that
it's going to be Delta team multiplied by E.
And so as time goes on this error is going to get bigger and bigger and bigger and bigger.
So if the error is in the acceleration you multiply by delta t twice then is going to get even bigger.
So this is why integration magnifies errors that are already present in the values.
If you got a small error in V then you're going to have an even bigger error over time in Delta X..
So that's one thing.
Integration is magnifying the errors caused by our numerical integration.
Furthermore rotation is doing a big thing for increasing the error as well.
If there is an error in our rotation.
So this is v.
This is the V that we wanted perhaps and we have a delta foetor which is the error in the rotation.
So it is the amount that we shouldn't really have rotated by but we did rotate a little bit extra.
And this gives us the V underscore n which has gone for vnu basically.
So what we're saying here is that this is the V we should have had v.n. is the V that we actually ended
up with because of a little bit of extra rotation we were meant to do a bit of rotation but we ended
up doing a bit extra.
This is now you can see very small delta foetor could be even smaller but very small and very large.
Arrow for a large velocity means that delta x the actual error in the location that results after one
iteration is going to be rather large.
And as time goes on is stealth X just gets bigger and bigger.
Basically set these things off on very divergent pathes and we are going to end up in very different
places so that is another magnification of error.
Sorry I noted that the title was wrong there so I have now changed its rotation magnification of error.
Okay so we've got these magnifications of error we've got these sources of error what are we going to
do about it.
How are we going to solve the error in our game.
So what I'd like you to do is to review the sources of error and review the magnifications of error.
Make a list of three potential solutions that you can think of.
Write down the pros and cons of each of the solutions.
And then I would like you to go ahead and share that on the community site and after you shared Don't
just share and hope that other people will reply to you make sure you go and comment on somebody else's
share and on their list of pros and cons and see if you can add any pros and cons to their potential
solutions see if you can think of any ways in which those solutions might not work.
So both the video and then will come back and have a look at my three potential solutions.
Okay welcome back.
So I really hope you have gone ahead and made your own potential list of solutions.
Don't worry if they're not exactly right or not the same as mine.
The important thing is to get brainstorming and get listing the pros and cons.
Don't worry if you can only find cons for your potential solutions.
If they could don't work that's fine.
You're just evaluating solutions and try get you into the habit of evaluating solutions.
Okay so let's have a look at my different approaches.
The first one is we noted that with velocity because there's a step we're going from acceleration to
velocity to delta x.
If we synchronize the velocity down from the server at least then we're going to remove some of the
error in creating that velocity locally.
We're going to remove one of those steps of integration so that should remove some error right.
That's a good approach.
Perhaps it's going to definitely reduce the error but it's not going to remove it entirely and it's
not going to do anything about our rotation magnification and it's still liable to introduce errors
from integrating that velocity into a delta X..
So it's not a complete solution.
It's maybe just an alleviation.
How about overwriting the location and rotation from the server.
Okay that could actually work because the server is the canonical source of state.
If we could write back the location of rotation from that kind of canonical source of date and if we've
got a difference in our simulation locally Well we just update it and overwrite it from the server.
No problem right.
Except well.
We're going to end up with some glitching because our simulation will take in a different direction
especially after rotation and we are then going to get reset back to where the server thinks we should
be.
So that could cause some uncomfortable gameplay for players and they think steering around the corner
when actually they whacked into the side that wouldn't be great.
And finally this is my last approach and probably the best one but also the most complicated so its
biggest con is that it's actually quite hard to implement.
Is that we simulate with a fixed timestep both on the server client and all the simulating clients.
What we're going to do is make sure the delta x is the same a delta T rather is the same on everything
which means that there will be errors from the integration but they will all be the same errors so we
should end up with the same results.
Now that's what we're going to aim towards.
But first of all we are going to try to implement number two and number one see see the limitations
see limitations actually in action and then we'll move on to the more complicated approach of simulating
3.
Always do it this way try and do the most simple approach first and see if it's going to be sufficient
because if no one and two were sufficient to make your game playable then you don't have to bother with
the complicated code involved in Step number three.
Okay so I'm going to see in the next video where we're going to get started on implementing the first
two approaches.